Programming Language Literacy
=============================

They say a good programmer should be familiar with a wide range of programming
languages, development tools, frameworks, and technologies. At the same time,
he never falls for one thing, obsessing over it and accepting it as a doctrine.
He knows which tools are the fundamental ones and learns to wield them
masterfully. But he also knows that most tools—the more complex ones—are only
useful as long as there is nothing better available. When a new thing emerges,
one that is objectively more suitable for solving a particular kind of
problems, he will gladly pick it up, learn how to use it and embrace it as a
better alternative to the one he's been using before.

He is the pragmatic programmer.

---

I've been doing programming for a living for a couple of years now, but I never
got to know as many languages (or, more precisely, programming language
paradigms) as I would liked to. And by getting to know I mean achieving a
certain level of understanding how the language works and what features it
exposes in order to create something with it, be it a game, command-line tool,
desktop app, webapp, or whatever.

During the last few years at school and a few more at the university I was
playing with C++, trying to come up with a nice little game, even if only a
simple one. I'm not using it now as I think it's got too much cruft that
inhibits most of its expressive abilities. But I'm still interested in its
future, especially in the light of the new C+11 standard and libc++ — a new
implementation of the C++ standard library written from scratch to be more
efficient and support all of the features defined by the aforementioned
standard out of the box.

But stay with me, this post is not about C++. In June of 2008 the first iPhone
SDK came out. I had been playing with the beta since April and I had a lot of
fun with basically starting from scratch with a new language on an emerging
platform. I picked up Objective-C rather quickly and started developing games
for the iPhone. Around that time I also learned Python and have been using it
ever since, mostly to write scripts and tools to automate different daily
routines.

Since then I haven't learned a new language. It's been almost 4 years and it's
a shame. In fact, I have always considered it the right thing to do — to
familiarize yourself with a new paradigm, with new idioms to widen your scope
and enrich your knowledge. But life just seemed fly by and I was never able to
catch up with it, to stop for a moment and think about what's right and what's
wrong, think of what I really should be doing. And although I've had some
experience with Scheme, clojure, Javascript, Java, and know a few things about
Haskell and Prolog, I can't boast any decent level of understanding of any of
these.

But now the time has come, I've decided to give it a try — to pick a language
I'm interested in and study it at least for a month. And by studying I mean
actively familiarizing myself with its syntax, idioms, libraries and problems
it is good at solving. And you, my dear reader, might find something of
interest to you as well as I'm going to post my impressions and observations in
this blog once a week or two.

So, let's get started! Find out what language I've decided to pick up first in
my next post.

---
Tags: proglang, literacy, learning, bio, resolutions

Date: Thu Mar  1 16:22:27 EET 2012
